[Music]
well this is the month of the final ease
I finally brought pictures on my gallery
well like I was saying for six months
that I was gonna do and I could also
finally tell you that the North American
version of my book will be coming out on
the 2nd of June and I will tell you all
about that at the end of this video
before that we have got so much to talk
about in terms of what you can see in
the night sky this month and what's been
going on in astronomy news this month as
well so without further ado let's start
by looking up
so first up on the 24th of March mercury
is going to be at the greatest
elongation in the morning sky before
dawn at the same time as Venus is gonna
be a its greatest elongation in the
night sky after sunset and what this
means is essentially it's the furthest
point that either of those planets are
going to get from the Sun it's a great
time to try and spot them it means that
mercury is going to rise just that
little bit earlier before sunrise and
reach a higher point in the sky before
the light of the Sun drowns it out and
it means that Venus is gonna hang around
for longer in the nighttime sky after
the Sun has set so because of that in
the days afterwards Venus is gonna be
quite high in the sky on the 27th it
comes across a nice toenail moon again
one of my favorite things to see so you
can use that to make sure that what
you're staring at out of a specific
window in your house is definitely Venus
then by the 2nd 3rd and 4th of April
Venus is going to be incredibly close to
the Pleiades star cluster also known as
the Seven Sisters after Greek mythology
because of the seven stars that are
generally visible with the naked eye
depending on how good your eyes are
anyway and I think it kind of looks like
a mini plow or a mini Big Dipper
whatever you want to call that
constellation this is the closest that
Venus is gonna get supply these for
about 8 years so if you really want that
perfect shot I'd take your chance now
then on the 19th of April which I think
could be into sort of next night sky
News's territory except we might just
miss it so I figured I'd tell you in
this one the Lyrid meteor shower is
going to peak now it's not one of the
most spectacular meteor showers of the
year it's only about 10 to 15 meteors an
hour but if you're up anyway early
morning on the 19th which is the best
time to spot it when the peak is gonna
be and you do see something streak
across the sky
know that it was probably a Lyrid meteor
shower if you are planning to
specifically go outside and try and spot
meteors first of all wrap up warm
because it'll be colder than you think
waiting around for a
time second of all what you need to do
is find northeast and then turn away
from it and that's the best chance you
have of spotting the meteors because the
constellation of Lyra will be in the
Northeast and that's the Radian and
everything will be coming from there so
that's it for what you can see in the
night sky this month remember if you see
any of these phenomenons send me
pictures because I love to see it just
like David's straw bed of the zodiacal
light the he spotted that I mentioned in
last month's video what a beautiful
photo that was that was sent in but
let's move on to space news mainly to
just distract ourselves from everything
that's going on on planet earth right
now instead starting off this segment
with one of my favorite images that was
released this month by NASA's Curiosity
rover it's some another of its huge big
panoramas of the surface of Mars and
this one is extra special because it is
so large it has 1.8 billion pixels in
total and it's just pixel perfection
let's be honest I could stare at this
thing endlessly you can really get lost
in this image I think it is so powerful
because it really lets you immerse
yourself in what that world would
actually be like and I love that feeling
speaking of other worlds the earth has a
new moon a mini moon to be precise and
it's called 2020 cd3 which is a terrible
name so let's give the IAU some
recommendations for names down in the
comments it was discovered on the 15th
of February by Theodore Prine and katka
V is a shot at the Mount Lemmon
Observatory in Arizona in the US and
that discovery was finally announced by
the Minor Planet Center which you know
looks after all the sort of small bodies
in the solar system on the 25th of
February so the reason that this was
actually spotted was because the lemon
Observatory is involved in the search
for near-earth asteroids they're
constantly monitoring the sky for
basically anything that moves that's
quite faint that could be an asteroid
that you know in orbit around the Sun
could have a collision course with earth
or like this one has actually been
captured by earth midway through its
orbit around the Sun and we think from
our observations of it sort of tracking
back its movements and where its orbit
would have been we think that happened
in about 20 16 17 so this thing has been
hanging around for quite a while and
we've only just spotted it and the
reason is because it's so incredibly
faint it's only something like max
three-and-a-half meters maybe 11 feet
across so it's really really small you
know put that at the distance of the
moon it doesn't reflect a lot of light
it's very very faint our best models for
what it's doing now and the previous
orbit it had around the Sun was that
when it was orbiting around the Sun it
was orbiting it very similar distance to
what Earth does it was just a much more
elliptical overall shaped orbit than
Earth has so it it would have crossed
Earth's orbit a couple of times and
eventually at one point it probably
would have been close enough to earth at
that crossing point and that's what
meant that it was captured now as we
model its orbit going forward we think
that it's actually going to go back into
orbit around the Sun rather than orbit
around the earth in April 2020 so we are
already pretty much losing this thing
just as we've discovered it I got very
excited about this mini moon especially
because it reminded me of the moon moons
from a couple of months ago moons that
go round moons what if the moon is also
capturing tiny asteroids like this as
well but it turns out that it's not
actually the first mini moon the earth
even had I mean of course Earth has been
around for like 4 and 1/2 billion years
so it probably isn't the first mini moon
the earth has ever had but it's the not
the first mini moon that actually we
knew about or have been able to detect
the same thing was spotted back in 2006
again its name was also shocking it was
2006 rh1 20
that wasn't renamed either and the cool
thing is yeah okay that orbited around
the earth for a while but it's now
orbiting the Sun again I'm one of these
elliptical orbits but because of sort of
the resonance between its elliptical
orbit and the Earth's orbit it means
that we might have a chance of
recapturing it again in six years time
so rh1 20 2006 whatever it's called
could come back
again this is why these things need new
names because if these are gonna be sort
of like transitory moons that we go sort
of from like having and then we take by
for a while then it comes back again I
need a new name you know rather than
being like oh all right 12 20s back we
need to call it something cool right
okay now for the next piece of news I
mean I hate to say I told you so but I
told you so
because Betelgeuse is getting brighter
again it didn't go supernova
so you remember at the back end of 2019
instead of into January 2020 Betelgeuse
started dimming which wasn't a rare
occurrence Betelgeuse does dim sort of
cyclically and we've seen this before
but it dimmed to like unprecedented
levels it dropped like 40% of its normal
brightness it went out of sort of like
you know the top 10 top 11 brightest
stars in the night sky you could even
see with the naked eye that it was so
much fainter than it usually was and
obviously people wondered whether okay
if it's dimming does that mean
that the nuclear fusion processes are
slowly running out in which case we
should expect Betelgeuse to die and go
supernova soon everyone got very excited
about because if it did you'd be able to
see the light from it in the daytime sky
like it would be bright enough to
outshine the Sun and obviously
astronomers have been monitoring this so
so closely you know there's been
astronomers telegrams like popping up
every single night having recorded you
know what the brightness of Betelgeuse
was and that night and taking spectra
where you split the light to your prism
etc to try and figure out what's going
on and we've now seen this month a
brightening of Betelgeuse again as
expected if these dips are cyclical but
obviously the question still remains as
to why this one was an unprecedented
level of dimming why was this one
specifically so much bigger than the
others there's obviously lots of
theories that have been thrown around
about this by various different people
in the academic community in the amateur
astronomy community and also just people
commenting online as well but a paper
that caught my eye this month was by
Levesque in math
who posed the explanation dust which if
you know anything about astrophysics in
general it's that you know that magnetic
fields and dust are just the bane of
astronomers lives so dust you know you
can kind of think of it as like the dust
you found find around your home you know
it's little clumping of particles and
it's slightly opaque that block the
light from stars or galaxies whatever it
is that's behind them so the basket
Massey did was make sure to get a
spectrum of Betelgeuse when it was at
its lowest brightness point and with
that spectrum when you split the light
from the star into its colors or its
component wavelengths you know you can
really see how much of each wavelength
that star has given out and that sort of
shape of that spectrum it's sort of like
a fingerprint of how the star is doing
it tells you how hot the star is for one
thing because you need more energy to
give off the higher wavelengths than you
do to give off the lower wavelengths you
see it had the same sort of features it
was clearly less light coming from it's
also slightly different shape and that
different shape gave them a new sort of
effective temperature of Betelgeuse
you know you get from sort of that
energy consideration and they found that
it was about 3,600 degrees Kelvin
compare that to like the Sun which is
like you know 5000 ish degrees Kelvin so
it's a lot cooler than the Sun now when
we do this with other stars and we
observe their brightness and separately
calculate their temperature from their
spectra you find there's obviously a
nice correlation between how bright they
are and what temperature they are now
the kicker with Betelgeuse here is that
stars of Betelgeuse new dimmer
brightness are a lot cooler than 3600
Kelvin so it's dimming and brightness
can't be explained by the star cooling
down ie running out of fuel for nuclear
fusion and getting less hot and
therefore being close to the end of its
life so the authors in this paper
suggested there must be another reason
to account for the dimming and so they
suggest dust which has actually come
from beef
juice itself it's a very unstable star
is close to the end of its life but I
mean like astronomically close like 150
thousand years or something like that
which is very close Ashley speaking
compared to like millions and billions
of years and so what it is done is it's
swollen up to what we call a red giant
and so it's not really holding on to its
outer layers very well at this point and
so it could be shedding some of those
outer layers and so when that sort of
hydrogen gas escapes and it meets sort
of the vacuum and coldness of empty
space it condenses down into these small
opaque particles that we call dust which
block a lot of the light now this also
makes sense if you look at images of
Betelgeuse taken before it started
dimming and now it's sort of a dodgy
shape now and so if there is some dust
in the way that could be explaining the
dimming the new different shape of why
the spectrum doesn't give you as cool of
a temperature as you'd expect from how
dim it's got so a few months ago in a
night sky news which I will link up here
somewhere I talked about a paper by
school Ron and collaborators who had
showed that the Milky Way which is the
galaxy of which the Sun is you know just
one star of a hundred billion stars in
isn't sort of a perfectly flattened disc
with a nice spiral structure it's
actually sort of warped in structure and
they did this by studying run about two
thousand very special stars that we can
get very accurate distances to to
basically map out the shape of the Milky
Way and it was very clear from the data
that yeah okay as you went further out
in radius in the Milky Way there was
some height difference in this sort of
stars that you found new showed that
yeah okay the Milky Way galaxy is warped
and as a funny shape and is not flat but
that was only done with 2,000 or so
stars and so in that video I said and
hopefully we'll be able to confirm that
when the results come out from the Gaia
mission which is observing some like a
billion stars in our galaxy to get all
their proper motions and distances
really accurately so I'll have to wait
and see if they
dire results also find the same thing
which brings us back to today when a
team led by Pacquiao and collaborators
have done just not with the gaya data
release - they used 12 million stars to
map out the positions and motions of
those stars to be able to track this and
lo and behold they have found the same
thing and confirmed that the Milky Way's
disk is actually walked and not flat the
thing that they also did though because
they have the motions of the stars from
Gaia this is what guy gives you is why
it's such a cool dataset is the fact
that this warp is actually prosthetic
and so what I mean by that is it it's
more piz moving now of course all the
stars in the Milky Way are rotating
around the very center where there's a
supermassive black hole and they're
doing so a particular speed but then
this warp is processing it a different
speed entirely it's about a third of how
fast the Sun goes round the Milky Way so
you can think of this like when you set
a spinning top going right the whole
thing spins but then also as it starts
to get a little bit unstable the whole
thing also then starts to move as well
exactly this kind of thing basically
happening in the Milky Way the question
is obviously still what caused this warp
and what caused it to process and so
that we see these weren't questions that
could be answered brace go runs and
towels 2,000 stars a couple months ago
but here they have been able to do that
especially with the precession
information because how fast the
precession is going according to our
best models of you know galaxies and
star movements in galaxies it's too fast
to have been caused just by internal
processes alone so you know from the
gravity between two stars of two stars
have a flyby or a cluster of stars has a
flyby and that causes some sort of
gravitational instability and sort of
sets this whole thing going if that
happened it wouldn't be going as fast as
this Walker's processing and so Poggi
own collaborators have suggested that
actually it comes from the fact that the
Milky Way has had a merger with another
galaxy now we're not talking what's
called a major
a way you have to galaxies are roughly
the same size colliding and you get this
sort of spectacular sort of shredding in
the spiral structure and it all coalesce
is back down into a blob that's what's
eventually going to happen between sort
of like the Milky Way and Andromeda
there's nothing to worry about cuz I'm
gonna happen in four billion years but
instead we're talking about something
like what we call a minor merger where
you have quite a small little dwarf
galaxies come in and merge with the
Milky Way something similar to say the
Magellanic Clouds that you can see from
the southern hemisphere which are two
satellite dwarf galaxies around the
Milky Way they're currently orbiting
around the Milky Way
what if we didn't just used to have to
we used to have three of those things
but the third one previously merged with
the Milky Way already and caused this
instability which has caused this warp
and then also caused this walk to start
processing around the Milky Way
it's funny how something so small can
have such a big impact on something so
large and funnily enough that is
actually the theme of the next piece of
news that I want to talk about which
many of you will have seen in the world
media reported as the largest explosion
since the Big Bang
we'll get that what astronomers found
evidence of this month was the a
supermassive black hole at the center of
a very large galaxy which is at the
center of a very large cluster of
galaxies essentially did a very large
bird what a better way now the energy
from this book did not come from the
black hole itself obviously because
black holes by definition you know
they're anything that's so massive that
light can't escape from it nothing can
escape from it because you have to be
traveling faster than the speed of light
which isn't possible now the energy and
material that was released came from
around the black hole and something we
call the accretion disk so literally
when you have material falling into the
black hole it comes and settles into
sort of a disc sort of leena like the
planets going around the Sun and
eventually that material will spiral
down
sort of be eaten by the black hole the
black hole will use it to grow its mass
now the thing is you can't just keep
chucking material at that black hole
willy-nilly it can't just you know
Hoover everything up it not the Hoover
of the universe eventually the pressure
builds and builds and builds because the
material is spiraling so so fast around
the black hole it heats up it starts
giving off x-rays as huge amounts of
friction the pressure is just so great
if you chuck too much stuff in that the
only thing it's able to do is
essentially release some of that
pressure in sort of a burp all right it
releases a lot of the material energy
around the black hole in either jets or
a wind or an outflow that goes very very
close to the speed of light and some of
those outflows you couldn't hide that
quite small and it's you know a little
bit difficult to spot when we have to do
some serious really cool observations
and some of them are impossible to hide
because they're these huge big long jets
that are longer than the galaxies that
they came out of you know like in
Messier 87 for example which in terms of
scale these Jets are huge in comparison
to the black holes so if the black hole
was an atom the galaxy it'd be a grain
of sand then the Jets would go across
your palm it's incredible that something
so tiny
massive yes like billions of times the
mass of the Sun but tiny in the in
this sort of space that it fits into
which is usually you know no bigger than
the solar system compared to the galaxy
which is hundreds of thousands of
light-years across so yes a huge amount
of energy came off this black hole and
it was very energetic it was ten million
times more energetic than your typical
supernova trying to put it in human
terms is very difficult it would have
been like releasing a thousand billion
billion billion billion atomic bombs all
at once but again that's not something
we can imagine either but we can't
imagine sort of the scale I think so
what ashram is actually found was that
this huge outburst of energy and
essentially blown a cavity in the gas
between all of the galaxies in this
cluster so the inter
lactic gas which is usually very hot and
it glows in x-rays and they could see
this sort of essentially great big coal
in it and that hole would essentially
fit about 17 Milky Way's in it and again
remember I said the supermassive black
hole is more like the size of the solar
system so the scale of this is crazy if
that we can put on human scales so for
example if I was to burp right now here
in the UK it would be like me blowing
out a cavity in the earth atmosphere
that went from the northeast tip of
Canada in Newfoundland all the way to
the Middle East so yes it was very
energetic five times more energetic than
the previous record-holder black hole
book that we'd ever seen however it was
nowhere near close to the energies in
the big bang like I tried to put some
numbers on this right it was a billion
billion times less energetic than the
energy that went into creating all the
matter in the universe and that was just
from a simple e equals mc-squared
consideration that's nowhere near the
entire energy that was in the Big Bang
you know the comparison is just
ridiculous like there's there's just no
point in even making it it would be like
me saying oh the pond in my back garden
is the closest body of water to
everybody in the vicinity except for the
Atlantic Ocean like it's a MOOC
comparison right like yeah okay it's a
correct statement but it was very
misleading to put that out there in the
media like that because you know I then
had news outlet asking me to comment on
this news about the Big Bang which it
wasn't anything to do with the Big Bang
it was about black hole burps which in
my book infinitely cooler anyway my
irritation aside on that this piece of
work was really really cool it was led
by Jesus in tushy who were following up
some work that was done looking at this
cluster in the x-rays and seeing that
yes there was a hole in sort of the gas
that was glowing in x-rays and people
like that's weird
and wonder what's cause that could have
been a supermassive black hole but no
it's far too big
surely a supermassive black hole
couldn't have caused that what Jesus
into she did was then follow up with
radio waves and the material that's
given off by the black hole the energy
that comes out generally tends to go in
the radio waves so if you can spot
something in radio waves you know that
the black hole has had a bit recently
and they found in that big empty cavity
in the x-ray gas there was loads over
radio waves and so it was literally like
the only logical conclusion that you
could draw it was like it has to have
been a black hole but the kicker was the
black hole in the very center we could
no longer see the x-ray emission coming
from that gas that was spiraling in
anymore
that's how we classified growing black
holes we called an active galactic
nuclei el AGN and there was no longer an
Ag N in the galaxies in the very center
of this cluster that would have given
off this outburst and so that's how we
know that it happened about 240 million
years ago sort of estimating that the
material would have been traveling at
very close to the speed of light but not
quite and then how big the cavity was
that it blew out like how far has that
material gone and so therefore how long
would it have taken to have gotten that
far and so what we're seeing here is
actually sort of like a fossil or a
relic of what did happen in this cluster
which is really cool because you know
with astronomy we we see things as they
happen at least in Earth's Reference
Room if the light arrives to it and we
really only get really a snapshot of
what's going on in the you know 14
billion years worth of evolution of that
galaxy so just getting a little hint of
something that's happened in its past in
its history is so awesome because now we
can sort of say okay well did it affect
this galaxy over here can we see
something that is equivalent to of
happening you know 240 million years ago
in there as well and sort of try and you
know piece the puzzle all back together
that's it for this month night Sky News
I hope I managed to distract you for a
little while so without any further ado
though let's talk about something happy
again my book is come
in the u.s. in Canada finally on June
2nd see I even said the date the way
that you guys say it for you
and this is a special version of the one
that was released in the UK so this is
an illustrated version of the one that
came out in the UK we've had an artist
do some really nice artwork that is
inspired by sort of scientific data and
is sort of scientifically accurate so
I'm really excited for you to see that
it has a different name but it's not a
different book per se like the words in
it are gonna be the same it's now called
space at the speed of light rather than
space 10 things you should know so be
aware of that there are all the links in
the description below so that you can
pre-order your copy in a hard book or an
e-book or an audio book in whichever
retailer that you like to use so I hope
all of you in the US and Canada will be
as excited about that as I am maybe
eventually in another six months or so I
get a nice piece of artwork from the
book on my gallery wall as well but
until then everybody happy stargazing
and I hate to say I told you so but
Beetlejuice did not go oh oh
you